DOCSP-41105 new About mongosync page (#345)
mongodb/docs-cluster-to-cluster-sync: source/reference/about-mongosync.txt

.. _about-mongosync:

====================
About ``mongosync``
====================

The ``mongosync`` binary is the primary process used in {+c2c-product-name+}. 
``mongosync`` migrates data from one cluster to another and keeps the 

> clusters in continuous sync. You can use ``mongosync`` to create dedicated 

Author: Fixed!

analytics, development, or testing clusters that mirror your production 
environment. 

``mongosync`` keeps track of its current actions through states. ``mongosync`` 
enters different states depending on the requests it receives. The current 
``mongosync`` state determines which API operations you can run. 
For more information on ``mongosync`` states, see 

> :ref:`mongosync States <c2c-states>`.

Author: Fixed!

How ``mongosync`` Works
-----------------------

Initial Connection
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

``mongosync`` must create an initial connection to the source and destination 
clusters before it can start to sync data. For more information, see 
:ref:`c2c-connecting`.

When ``mongosync`` connects to the source and destination clusters, the 
synchronization process is in the :ref:`IDLE <c2c-state-idle>` state.  

During Sync 
~~~~~~~~~~~

The :ref:`start <c2c-api-start>` endpoint begins the 
:ref:`RUNNING <c2c-state-running>` state. 

During the sync, ``mongosync`` syncs data from the source cluster to the 
destination cluster. If you make subsequent writes to the source cluster, 

> ``mongosync`` applies the operations to the destination cluster.  

Reviewer: Same goes for all the sections. I would suggest starting with the high level overview of what is actually happening and then go into the technical details about how to enter each stage

> ``mongosync`` applies the operations to the destination cluster.  

Author: Ok, that sounds good. I updated the sections, please let me know what you think!

For every collection on the source, ``mongosync`` creates a corresponding 
collection on the destination. 

``mongosync`` temporarily alters some collection characteristics during 
the ``RUNNING`` state and changes these back to their source 
cluster characteristics during the ``COMMIT`` state. For more information, see
:ref:`Commit Alters <c2c-commit-alters>`.

Collection Copy
'''''''''''''''

Collection copy is the initial full data transfer that copies each collection 
from the source cluster to the destination cluster. ``mongosync`` performs 
collection copy by splitting each source collection into partitions and copying
all the partitions to their corresponding destination collections.

Change Event Application
''''''''''''''''''''''''

The change event application (CEA) process continuously updates 
the destination cluster when you make changes to the source cluster. If there 
are multiple ``mongosync`` instances, all the ``mongosync`` instances finish 

> collection copy before starting the CEA process.

Author: Fixed!

During CEA, ``mongosync`` receives :ref:`change stream <changeStreams>` events 
from the source cluster, converts these events into writes, and applies these 
writes on the destination cluster. CEA ensures that :ref:`CRUD <crud>` and 
:ref:`DDL <c2c-mongosync-ddl>` events from the source cluster are accurately

> applied to the destination cluster.

Author: On second thought, I agree. I will just delete the sentence. If we are not going to explain the difference between them there is no point stating this.

Pausing Sync
~~~~~~~~~~~~

The :ref:`pause <c2c-api-pause>` endpoint begins the 
:ref:`PAUSED <c2c-state-paused>` state.

During the ``PAUSED`` state, the sync process is paused.

The :ref:`resume <c2c-api-resume>` endpoint resumes a paused synchronization 
session and returns ``mongosync`` to the ``RUNNING`` state. 

Finalizing Sync
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The :ref:`commit <c2c-api-commit>` endpoint begins the 
:ref:`COMMITTING <c2c-state-committing>` state.

During the ``COMMITTING`` state, ``mongosync`` finalizes the sync between the 
source cluster and the destination cluster by stopping continuous sync 
between them. It also restores collection characteristics that ``mongosync`` 
temporarily alters during synchronization. 

Once you call the ``commit`` endpoint, ``mongosync`` halts any writes on the 
source cluster and retrieves the timestamp of the most recent operation in the 
source cluster. 

If there are no errors, ``mongosync`` sends a success message and exits CEA by 
processing events up until the commit timestamp. Then, ``mongosync`` corrects 
indexes and resolves document conflicts. If write blocking is enabled, 

> ``mongosync`` turns write operations back on. 

Author: I struggled with this because in most situations it is mongosync that enables write blocking, not the user (above I write "``mongosync`` halts any writes on the 
source cluster"). What do you think about saying, "If write blocking is ``true``"?

> ``mongosync`` updates its state to :ref:`COMMITTED <c2c-state-committed>` once 
> the ``COMMITTING`` state is over. The ``COMMITTED`` state indicates the 

Reviewer: [suggestion & question] Suggestion for minimalism. Additionally, can you clarify what it means for the "committing" state to be over? 

```suggestion
``mongosync`` enters the  :ref:`COMMITTED <c2c-state-committed>` state once 
the ``COMMITTING`` state is over. The ``COMMITTED`` state indicates the 
```

Author: Changed to "When the above process is completed, ``mongosync`` enters the 
:ref:`COMMITTED <c2c-state-committed>` state."

We enter the "COMMITTED" state once CEA is exited, the indexes are corrected, and write operations are back on.

.. _about-mongosync:

> ========================
> About ``mongosync``
> ========================

Reviewer: The heading markers should align with the length of the title (sometimes spacing comes out a little funky on GitHub so as long as it is aligned on vscode, its all set)

```suggestion
===================
About ``mongosync``
===================
```

Author: Fixing now!

The ``mongosync`` binary is the primary process used in {+c2c-product-name+}. 
``mongosync`` migrates data from one cluster to another and keeps the 
clusters in continuous sync. You can use ``mongosync`` to create dedicated 
analytics, development, or testing clusters that mirror your production 
environment. 

> ``mongosync`` enters different states depending on the requests it receives. 

Reviewer: Can you provide a sentence about what states actually are?

Author: Adding now!

The current ``mongosync`` state determines which API operations you can run. 
For more information on ``mongosync`` states, see 
:ref:`mongosync States <c2c-states>`.

.. note:: 

   Most state transitions happen as the result of an API call. The exceptions 
   are:

   - The transition from ``COMMITTING`` to ``COMMITTED``

>    - The transition from ``REVERSING`` to ``RUNNING``

Reviewer: I'm not sure if we need this because it may be too technical for this general overview page.

Author: I see what you mean, I will instead move this note to the "mongosync states" page.

How ``mongosync`` Works
------------------------

Initial Connection
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

``mongosync`` must create an initial connection to the source and destination 
clusters before it can start to sync data. For more information, see 
:ref:`c2c-connecting`.

> When ``mongosync`` connects to the source and destination clusters, it is in the 

Reviewer: [suggestion] for clarity

```suggestion
When ``mongosync`` connects to the source and destination clusters, the synchronization process is in the 
```

Author: Fixed!

:ref:`IDLE <c2c-state-idle>` state.  

During Sync 
~~~~~~~~~~~~

The :ref:`start <c2c-api-start>` endpoint begins the 
:ref:`RUNNING <c2c-state-running>` state. 

> If you start a new sync, ``mongosync`` syncs data to the destination cluster. 
> If you make subsequent writes to the source cluster, ``mongosync`` applies them 
> to the destination cluster.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
During the sync, ``mongosync`` syncs data from the source cluster to the destination cluster. 
If you make subsequent writes to the source cluster, ``mongosync`` applies the operations 
to the destination cluster.  
```

Author: Fixed!

For every collection on the source, ``mongosync`` creates a corresponding 
collection on the destination. 

``mongosync`` temporarily alters some collection characteristics during 
the ``RUNNING`` state and changes these back to their source 
cluster characteristics during the ``COMMIT`` state. For more information, see

> :ref:`Commit Alters <c2c-commit-alters>`.

Reviewer: This may also be too technical for this page

Author: I added this part because Jian and Rohan mentioned this during the meeting as something to explain. I will leave this conversation unresolved so they can take a look during the external review.

Collection Copy
'''''''''''''''

> Collection copy is the initial full data transfer that copies each collection 

Reviewer: [question] should this be "The collection copy"? Is "Collection copy" a process or it it the entity that has been copied?

```suggestion
The collection copy is the initial full data transfer that copies each collection 
```

Author: The internal docs refer to it as "collection copy" and it is the actual copying process.

Reviewer: in that case, I would suggest the following wording for clarity!

```suggestion
The collection copy process is the initial full data transfer that copies each collection 
```

Author: I like this, changing now!

from the source cluster to the destination cluster. ``mongosync`` performs 
collection copy by splitting each source collection into partitions, gathering 

> all partitions from all collections into one list, and copying all partitions 

Reviewer: [question] can we either (A) talk about how the list of partitions is related to the process or (B) remove mentions of the list? I find it a bit confusing that the list is brought up but then not mentioned again

Author: Good point, I will go with (B) because I don't think the list is important for the users to know about. Changing to "``mongosync`` performs 
collection copy by splitting each source collection into partitions and copying all the partitions to their corresponding destination collections."

to their corresponding destination collections.

Change Event Application

> '''''''''''''''''''''''''

Reviewer: same comment as the heading one above

Author: Fixed!

> Change event application (CEA) is an ongoing process that continuously updates 

Reviewer: [suggestion] for minimalism

```suggestion
The change event application (CEA)  process continuously updates 
```

Author: Fixed!

> the destination cluster when there are changes to the source cluster. If there 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the destination cluster when you make changes to the source cluster. If there 
```

Author: Fixed!

are multiple ``mongosync`` instances, all the ``mongosync`` instances finish 

> collection copy before entering CEA.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
collection copy before starting the CEA process.
```

Author: Fixed!

During CEA, ``mongosync`` receives :ref:`change stream <changeStreams>` events 
from the source cluster, converts these events into writes, and applies these 

> writes on the destination cluster. CEA ensures both :ref:`CRUD <crud>` and 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
writes on the destination cluster. CEA ensures that both :ref:`CRUD <crud>` and 
```

Author: Fixed!

> :ref:`DDL <c2c-mongosync-ddl>` operations are handled accurately.

Reviewer: [suggestion] for active voice

```suggestion
:ref:`DDL <c2c-mongosync-ddl>` operations execute accurately.
```

Reviewer: Rephrasing the question for clarity, does "accurately" mean that if a write operation is applied on the source, the operation executes as expected on the source or does it mean that if a write operation is applied on the source, it is synced as intended on the destination

Author: "Accurately" means "if a write operation is applied on the source, it is synced as intended on the destination." I just changed the wording to clarify this!

Pausing Sync
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The :ref:`pause <c2c-api-pause>` endpoint begins the 

> :ref:`PAUSED <c2c-state-paused>` state. To use the ``pause`` endpoint, 
> ``mongosync`` must be in the ``RUNNING`` state.

Reviewer: [suggestion] I think we could take out this technical detail for minimalism 

```suggestion
:ref:`PAUSED <c2c-state-paused>` state.
```

Author: Agreed, fixed!

During the ``PAUSED`` state, the sync process is paused.

The :ref:`resume <c2c-api-resume>` endpoint resumes a paused synchronization 

> session and returns ``mongosync`` to the ``RUNNING`` state. To use the 
> ``resume`` endpoint, ``mongosync`` must be in the ``PAUSED`` state.

Reviewer: same comment as above

```suggestion
session and returns ``mongosync`` to the ``RUNNING`` state. 
```

Author: Fixed!

> Committing Sync
> ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Finalizing Sync
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
```

Author: Fixed!

The :ref:`commit <c2c-api-commit>` endpoint begins the 

> :ref:`COMMITTING <c2c-state-committing>` state. To use the ``commit`` endpoint, 
> ``mongosync`` must be in the ``RUNNING`` state. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:ref:`COMMITTING <c2c-state-committing>` state.
```

Author: Fixed!

During the ``COMMITTING`` state, ``mongosync`` finalizes the sync between the 
source cluster and the destination cluster by stopping continuous sync 
between them and restoring collection characteristics that ``mongosync`` 

> temporarily alters during synchronization. 

Reviewer: [suggestion] This sentence is really long. Can you split it into multiple sentences?

Author: Split into two sentences

Once you call the ``commit`` endpoint, ``mongosync`` halts any writes on the 
source cluster and retrieves the timestamp of the most recent operation in the 
source cluster. 

> If there are no errors, you see a success message and ``mongosync`` exits CEA by 
> processing events up until the commit timestamp. Then, ``mongosync`` corrects 
> indexes and resolves document conflicts. If write blocking is enabled, 
> ``mongosync`` turns write operations back on. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If there are no errors, ``mongosync`` sends a success message and exits CEA by 
processing events up until the commit timestamp. Then, ``mongosync`` corrects 
indexes and resolves document conflicts. If write blocking is enabled, 
``mongosync`` turns write operations back on. 
```

Author: Fixed!

``mongosync`` updates its state to :ref:`COMMITTED <c2c-state-committed>` once 
the ``COMMITTING`` state is over. The ``COMMITTED`` state indicates the 
:ref:`cutover process <c2c-cutover-process>` is finished, and you can direct 
writes to the destination cluster.

Reversing Sync
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The :ref:`reverse <c2c-api-reverse>` endpoint starts the 
:ref:`REVERSING <c2c-state-reversing>` state. To use the ``reverse`` endpoint, 
``mongosync`` must be in the ``COMMITTED`` state. 

During the ``REVERSING`` state, ``mongosync`` copies data from the 
destination cluster to the source cluster. Then, ``mongosync`` swaps the source 
and destination clusters and resumes applying change events.

> If ``REVERSING`` is successful, ``mongosync`` enters the ``RUNNING`` state. The 

Author: Fixed!

.. _about-mongosync:

====================
About ``mongosync``
====================

The ``mongosync`` binary is the primary process used in {+c2c-product-name+}. 
``mongosync`` migrates data from one cluster to another and keeps the 
clusters in continuous sync. You can use ``mongosync`` to create dedicated 
analytics, development, or testing clusters that mirror your production 
environment. 

``mongosync`` keeps track of its current actions through states. ``mongosync`` 
enters different states depending on the requests it receives. The current 

> ``mongosync`` state determines which API operations you can run. 

Author: According to the internal docs, "States represent Mongosync’s current action. This is a public data point." I don't originally have this in the docs, but users can track monosync's progress by calling the progress API endpoint, which will tell them what state they are currently in. So I guess it is both an actual process and a tracking mechanism for the user. Do you think I should talk about the progress endpoint on this page to clarify? I originally thought it was unnecessary because I didn't want to give the user instructions.

For more information on ``mongosync`` states, see 
:ref:`mongosync States <c2c-states>`.

How ``mongosync`` Works
-----------------------

Initial Connection
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

``mongosync`` must create an initial connection to the source and destination 
clusters before it can start to sync data. For more information, see 
:ref:`c2c-connecting`.

When ``mongosync`` connects to the source and destination clusters, the 

> synchronization process is in the :ref:`IDLE <c2c-state-idle>` state.  

Author: Fixed!
